INTRODUCTION:
Global warming is a major threat to humans and the natural world

Global warming basics: 
The ultimate source of global warming is the burning of fossil fuels or 
carbon based fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas, which leads to
emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2). Gases such as CO2 are called green-
house gases(GHGs). They accumulate in the atmosphere and stay there for a 
long time. The inital warming effects of climate change are amplified through
positive feedback loops in the atmosphere, oceans, ice sheets, and biological
systems. The resulting impacts include changes in temperatures as well as 
impacts on temperature extremes, preciptation patterns, storm location and 
frequency, etc. 

Current climate change is caused by human activities. 

The major driver of global warming is the emissions of CO2 concentrations from
the burning of fossil fuels. 

Impacts of climate change:
    the major concern isnt temperature per se, but the impact this will have
    on humanity.

Concerns: 
    Scientists are concerned about tipping points in the earth's systems.
    This is essentially irreversible changes as systems cross thresholds

Economic aspects of strategies to slow cliamte change:
    - Mitigation: reducing Co2 and GHG emmisions. 
    (This approach is expensive, however. Will cost 1-2% of world income)

    We burn fossil fuels, we emit CO2 into the atmosphere, and this leads to 
    harmful impacts. 

    Those who produce CO2 do not pay for that privilege, and those who are 
    harmed, are not compensated. In economics, unregulated markets cannot 
    deal with externalities. 

    IMPORTANT: Because there is a 0 price on the external damages of CO2 emissions

Truth about climate change in economics:
    For any policy to be effective, we must raise the market price of CO2 
    and other other GHG emissions. Putting a price on Co2 corrects for the 
    underpriced externalities of CO2. 
    -- We can make CO2 regulated -- 

    We could raise prices by putting regulatory tradeable limit on amount of
    allowbale emissions (cap and trade). or by using a carbon tax. 



