January 9th 2023:

  What is art?:
    - Random house dictionary defines "art" as the "quality, production, expression, or realm of what is beautiful or of more than ordinary significance."
    Others have defined art as something human-made that combines creative imagination and technical skill, and satisfies an innate desire for order and harmony.

    - 

    - At various times and places, the complex notion of what is art has little to do technical skill or beauty.

    - Also, how we interpret art is greatly influenced by our upbringing, education, gender, race, experiences, and economic status. 

    - Works of art do not always have to be created by individuals who percieve themselves as artists, Nor all works produced for an art market. 

  What is art history?
    In art history, historians aim to study art from the perspective of its original context of production and reception (those who formed the origninal audience)

    The work of art historians can be divided into 4 sections:
      1. assessment of physical properties
      2. analysis of visual or formal structure
      3. identification of subject matter or conventional symbolism
      4. integration within cultural context

    Assessing physical properties:
      - The most objective method of study for art historians
      - Requires a close inspection of the work itself

  Identifying subject matter:
    When we seek to understand the subject of a work of art we derive meaning intitially from two ways:
      - first we recognize and percieve "natural subject matter" by recognizing forms and expressions from our own personal life
      - Then "iconography" to identify the conventional meanings associated with forms as bearers of narrative or symbolic content

  Natural Subject matter:
    We recognize certain things simply by living in a world similar to that represented by the artist

  iconography: some subjects are associated with conventional meanings established at a specific time and place. Discovering these conventional 
               meanings is iconography. 

  Integration within cultural contexts:
    analyze the work through an embodiment of its cultural situation (economic, political context)

January 11th 2023:
  
  In class notes:
  
    Art - the expression or application of uman creative skill and imagination,

    typically in visual form sich as painting or sculpture, producing Works

    to be appreciated primarily for their beauty or emotional power

    ART = FORM + CONTENT 

    Always go beyong description - How did the author create meaning?

    ---------CULTURAL CONTEXT---------

 implied lines: lines we dont see, but follow with our eyes

 visible lines: can imply movement (perhaps add to composition)

 Space: even empty space can impliciate meanings

 Scale: the size in relation to a standard nomral size 

 Propotion: Size in relation to something else 

 texture: surface quality

 Actual texture: surface quality 

 Perceived texture 

 Movement can be created through: Line color, rhythm in repitition

composition: Overall organization of forms/ space 

Often incorporates multtiple formal elements
Content Analysis:
  - Story / Plot / Subject
  - Characters
  - Setting

  Point of view
  - Theme / Genre 
  - symbolism
  - Meaning 
  - Function 
  - Possible interpretations 


Janurary 13th 2023: 

  Old testament:
    The first section of the bible covering the creation of earth through noah and the flood, moses, and more, finishing with the jews begin expelled
    to babylon

  New testament: tells the story of the life of jesus and the early days of christanity, most notably paul's efforts to spread Jesus' teaching
  It collects 27 books, all originally written in Greek

  The sections of the new testament concering Jesus are called the Gospels


  The bible contains the word of God...

 There is no rule against copying an image of christ, there is a rule of creating an image based on interpretation

January 18th 2023 DISCUSSING GOTHIC architecture YEAHHHHHHH:
  "Gothic" was a perjorative name used during renaissance period to describe the art of the late middle ages

  Gothic art being with relation to the contruction of churches, has relation with religion

  Basilica - tribunal chamber of a king

    Basilica was used as a framework for churches

  Romanesque art (following the style of the roman):
    - Arch of constantine 
    - Saiont-Gilles Gard
    - Barrel vault
  
  (can be identified if the features are well known)

  Where and when did gothioc art appear? 
    Gothic style began in the mid 12th century 

    Gothic was urban art. cities were becoming prosperous when gothic appeared

    - Every city wanted to have its own cathedral, the most characterisic....

    Abbot suger was instrumental in the development of the gothic style of architecture 

  Introduction of the pointed arch:
    - originated from the middle east
    
    ROUNDED arch -> Romanesque 
    POINTED arch -> gothic

    The arch choice goes with the construction of the church and its formfactor
    A rounded arch is often part of building that are bulkier (has to do with how the weight of the building sits on the arch)

    Flying buttresses:
      in order to prevent the outward collapse of the arches...
      (almost looks like a skeleton comming out of te main structure)

    4 Features of gothic architecture:
      flying buttresses 
      pointed arches 
      ...
      ...

  Opus modernum ("modern work")

  Opus francigenum ("French work")

  in summary, gothic art is the use of pointed arches

  High gothic:
    developing the height of pointed arches
  Rayonnant Gothic/Radiant Gothic (1250-1370):
    Tendency toward the use of more and more stained glss and less masonry in the design....
  Flamboyant Gothic (Exuverant decorations - the artists started to play with the architecture once they got more proficient)
    Gargoyles:
      Gargoyles 
      Gurgulio (latin)
      (the practical use of Gargoyles was to protect the structure from water, as a way to sustain the cathedral)
      Apotropaic supposedly habing the power to aver evil influence or bad luck

    世界は残酷だそれでも、君を愛すよ。生きてるの方が死ぬより

  Stained glass windows meaning:
    Abbot Suger expressed the correspondence between the physical space of the church and its spiritual aim-
    to conduct the soul torwards the contempltation of the divine
    (cathedrals are an entire experience, not just a place of worship. There is meaning behind the element of light)


    The bright lights were used to express the glory of god, while the light streaming was used to represent the divine 
    in the cathedrals

    "Lux Nova" means "new light" and it specifically refers to advent of stained glass... 

    the images and statues on these churches established the iconography of moments of christanity

    Most of the gothic cathdedrals are dedicated to the virgin mary 

    The question you mainly want to ask is why?
      Why did they do what they did?
        How does that create meaning?

  January 23 2023:

    Aristocratic - courtly love was practiced by noble lords and ladies; its proper milieu was the royal palace or court

    Ritualistic: Couples engaged in a courtly relationship conventionally exchanged gifts and tokens of their affair 

    Secret: Courtly lovers.... 

    The interesting thing about this courtly love is how the women has a position of power; women were given a more 
    predominant role 

    Romantic can be traced to old french romanz, which referred to the vernacular 'romance' lagnuages

    Taking part of yourself in the aspect of beauty was part of the lives of an upperclass person 

    Nicola Pisano Pulpit (podium preists would stand on)

January 23 2023:
  Byzantine style (Before the gothic period) rejected the realistic forms..

  Pantocrator: "Ruler of all"

  The use of light in the Byzantine period illuminated the mosaics and figures inside the buildings (gave a sense of movement)

  maniera greca: "greek style"

  notice the gold background in meniera greca

  There are differences in Cimabue and Giotto's depiction of mary:
    most notebaly the breasts of mary are more visible in Giotto's 

  Holy figures usually have a halo aroudn them to symbolize that they are holy

  think about how you feel when viewing images --- again, look at the meanings


月が転生

Friday January 27th:
  After the death of saint francis, there was a huge shift of art production

  Christus Triumphans vs Christus patiens:

    Chritus Trumphas:
      Representing christ in a flat form, in his crucifiction
      Because of saint francis, the representation of christ is now in suffering and/or dead
      Portraying christ as dead humanizes him, makes him more relatable and allows people to find a 
      deeper connection

      The franciscans were like "oh he's suffering like me, im not alone"

      Currently, in cartholic churches, we only see dead chirst - there is barely any triumphant chirst

      Another change within paitens style is how artists like Giotta created an actual body people can view

Basilica Supre...

  The life of saint francis:
    .... found in canvas - already read it

どうしようかな。。。

Monday January 30th 2023:
  life of saint francis continued:

    Focusing on two scenes:
      Giotto - The kiss of Judas 1304-1306

      Judas' clothes are enveloping jesus, illustrating his corruption spreading onto jesus. 
      Look at how jesus is looking down at Judas, its like he is judging judas from above. 
      Judas is trying to reach up to jesus, as if he is trying to reach up to jesus - to reach to his level

      .... - Death of saint Francis?....

        In the painting, there is depiction of the devil using a face; the face possesses sharp features 
        The painting emphasizes that the devil is everywhere

Febuary 1st 2023:

  "Ave Gratia Plena Dominvs Techcvm"

    maniera greca was made to make things heaven like - otherworldly

   Look at the gaze and posture of the angel, it creates a sense of intimacy

    Look at how large the dialouge is and its gold color. They both make the viewer want to come closer

    (if I'm an artist, I want to include things that can resonate with you.)

      Thus, according to the above, the author used upper-class clothes at the time to use as clothes
      for the angel

    Allegory:
      is the description of a subject in the guise of another subject


    various allegories in: The allegory of Good and Bad Government

February 3rd 2023:
  What is interesting in the piece shown is that you read it from left to right
  "Beauty reflects moral value" This is similar to how jesus is depicted as a beatiful white dude LMAOOO

  Saying that the artsist's depiction of cruelty is beatiful doesnt mean that you're a dickhead. You need to 
  appreciate the author's creativity and the meaning they are creating. Their power to create such an emotional 
  reaction

  christianity has a strange relationship with depicting nudity 


  Starting a new topic today:
    The rise of painting in the burgundian netherlands

      "we'll be looking at illuminated manuscripts" - basically just decorated books

       These illuminated books was mainly possessed by women

       Look at the saturated blue, this color was a way to show the wealth. Blue was an expensive color back then 

       You can also notice the levels of education - the men were exposing themselves which implicates their level 
       of social class - prob not rich enough to afford edcuation

       Look at the use of proportion; the duke wants to show off his wealth 

       Look at the clothing in whe workers; they are barely clothed 

       could be a visual pun;

       When looking at different pieces; ASK QUESTIONS!!! is that a real place, what are they doing, who are they?

February 8th 2023:
  Johannes de eyck fuit hic 1434 --> I was here (what does this mean to the viewer?)
  Don't use today's way of thinking to judge the past
  The candles on the side of the husband is not lit, implicating that she is dead 
  The included dog was likely added for her memorial - fav pet 
  Dogs were also used to entertain the dead 

  he's trying to mimic the upper class by wearing their clothes, telling them "yo this is what you could look like"

February 10th:
  Try to analyze are without bias - take it as it is

  The renaissance:
    yoooooooo

    1. Meaning rebirth or revival -- historical period of apporximately 300 years marked by a revival in literature

    2. The period served as a bridge or transition between medieval and modern western europe

    - interested in human achievement (separated sprituality)

    - used critical methods of study

   - believed in humanism

  patrons and comissioned artists????? (nice)

  Lorenzo de' medici:
    Lorenzo considered to be the greatest patron of the arts

    - commissionsed artists and musicians like michelangelo, botticelli, and verrocchio
      (lorzeno literally gave michelangelo an education, turning him into a greater person)

  Florence Baptistery:
    becomming baptised makes you a Florence citizen

  The guilds of Florence were secular association

Febraury 13th 2023:
  The story of david is in a battle between the philistines and isrealites, the best philistine warrior.

  david's body posture, he seems loose and posing over goliath's body
  
  Donatello made the body almost sensual/erotic. Thus Donatello's "david" was a commentary on 
  homosocial values: in Florence, during this period it was common for men to think they could 
  only achieve true love only for other men.

  "Art can be the center of culture and provide commentary on various cultural norms"

  Look at the sculptures realism: the renaissance emphasized the representation of the body

  Mary magdalene was a disciple of jesus. Long haired, blond, usually a convenctional beatiful woman

  Donatello created a sculpture of mary magdalene praying, depicting mary as uglier with a frail boney body.
  Mary's hands are very close to each other, however, to the close the distance between the hands, the viewer must 
  also do their part. Mary magdalene by Donatello are illustrates what christianity is. Materialistic objects are 
  trivial and faith is what matters

  Creating a linear perspective:
    - horizon and horizontal lines.
    - Vanshing point


February 15th 2023:
  Brancaci Chapel:
    1424-1428

  Art of adam and eve naked:
    Look at eve - how her armed is wrapped around the tree snake thing; she is tempting adam to eat the apple. This parralels 
    to the depiction of the devil. the devil is usually portayed as a woman. This illustrates how woman were viewed as drivers 
    for sinning? I guess?

    In the second painting of them naked, they are both shameful of being naked in different ways. Eve is ashamed of her body,
    and covering it up. Adam is more full of dissapointment. Also, look at their faces - Eve is a lot more ugly

    I think there is more sacredness to nudity in women. The virgin mary had jesus as a "virgin." she was fucking lying but.
    virgin mary didnt have sex, so women showing sexuality and their bodies was looked down upon because it was never
    popularized.

  The virgin and child by Fra Filippo (scandelous because it depicted the artist's girlfriend lol):
    look at the frame: its more like a window

    Look at her clothes and how upper class her fashion was. This was used to highlight mary's beauty

    Look at her facial expression: virgin mary is sad - its like she know's whats to come 

    - jesus was actually engaging with mary perhaps, he had the wisdom of a grown man


  Painting of virgin mary and angel:
    - Look at the disproportion of mary and the angel: this is medieval!!!!

    - Slightly pointed arches i guess

    - look at the enclosed space, repesenting the sanctity and protection of virgin Mary

    -


  February 17th 2023:
    In the first painting, there was a strong sense of composition; 

    The second piece, the resurrection of chirst (piero della Francesca). The composition used shapes to create a sense of 
    "stability." There was also a naturalistic represenation to this use of geometry

    botticelli's painting of the "birth of venus" implements a non-linear perspective. look at the proportions of the paintings
    as well. They're appearing larger than they should be


February 20th 2023:
  Look at the proportions; they are distorted - his legs looks a lot shorter. The perspective fits with this proportion, however.
  
  chirst is a guy, he has pee pee. However, you dont want to humanize him too much while also not exposing nudity because churchrules
  rules

 I fucked up, bruh. Gah damn already???????????

 LEONARDO DA VINCIII - Michealangelo - Raphael 

 Leonardo da vinci is from vinci italy, an illegitimate son to a peasant woman and a successful notary, 
 he began his life facing hardship and obscurity

 He had no privelage of a formal education - he did what he could to get better 

 Leonardo da Vinci 

 Leonardo da Vinci was literally everything at once

 Leonardo and botticelli knew each other - both of them was working on a restaurant

 Virgin of the rocks - Leonardo Da Vinci --> 1483 - 86

 Look at how the angel is looking at you, pointing to baby jesus

Leonardo da vinci, Lady with Ermine
  Her gaze is looking away - what is she looking at? 

  The gaze of the sheep she's carrying is also following her gaze

  bruh why the fuck is the ermine jacked as fuck

  an ermine winter coat has connotations with purity 

The last supper - Leonardo Da vinci 

  really fucking famous 

  restoration lasted more than 20 years 

  leonardo used a mixture of fresco and oil paiting 

  Leonardo really relied on lines to make this piece

  judas doesnt have a halo on him because of his betrayal

February 22nd 2023: 
  uglyness is associated with malice usually

  leonardo was following the general culture but was also challenging the expectations 
  
  "take this bread, for this is my body, this fine for this is my blood"

  the Last supper:
    judas is now holding the bag of money, leonardo extends the narrative

    no halos

    he as using a linear perspective

    look how naturalistic it is: everyone looks like are flowing

    Look at the symmetrical composition

    Leonardo created this circular motion

    Look at how chirst is shaped like a triangle - the most stable geometric shape. the top is pointing to heaven

    Chirst also has the sun radiating from his head

    the last supper became so iconic, it became part of pop culture and modern media



  Increduilty of saint thomas - Caravaggio:
    more stuck to realism, meant to reflect the unsanitary and primitive aspects of early life

  Increduilty of saint thomas - Cima da Conegliano:
    look at how christ and everyone is very clean and well put together


  Mona Lisa:
    Mea Domina, Mia Signora / My Lady

    Lisa Gherardini?

    Mona Lisa's identify is still unconfirmed

    some people think it is a self portate of leonardo as a woman


  Look at how chirst is shaped like a 

    心を燃やせ


March 10th 2023:
the last judgment again

Look at how the woman is covered in the revision; the church did not approv 
of this 

Sainte Blaise - He was skinned alive (part of his martydom)

Minos (judge of hell) you notice this in Michealangelo's painting

Circles of hell in dante's inferno 

1. Limbo
2. Lust
3. Gluttony..

7...Treachery

Allegory of the cave / Plato

Venician renaissance holy shiiii

History of Venice:
  History of venice starting in the mid-fifth century

  a group of islands make up the italian ciry state of Venice

  Venice is built on an arcapaelgo 

  Saint Mark cathedral is the main church in italy (it is byzantine style)

  Symbol of venice is the winged lion - similar to how the symbol of mark is 
  also the wigned lion

  Giovanni Bellini St. Francis in Ecstasy 1475-1480 

  Saint Francis just embraced god's call. him being barefoot represents how 
  Saint Francis didnt care about earthly worries like putting on shoes.


