April 4th 2023:
  TA Grades most stuff
  
  Learning Outcomes:
    Describe the physiographic setting of the PNW
    characterize the climate of the PNW
    Descsribe the population distribution of the PNW 
    Differentiate between climate change adaptation and mitigations

    Where is the pacific northwest: 
      Washington, Oregon, Idaho

    The land cover between the west and east are different; for example, west is greener and east is browner 

    Snow cover is more prominent in the east than west

    The pacific ocean moderates the temperatures on the coastline. On average, the temperatures would not be as extreme 
    as other midwestern states since they dont have an ocean

    The pacific ocean is really C O L D, which also cools the pacific northwest

    The rainshadow effect:
      you some mountain range that is changing the range of precipitation in an area

      All the air cools as it travels up on a mountain and then precipitates. when the air comes down it becomes warmer and
      very little precipitation occurs

      rainshadow effect becomes more exaggerated as the rainshadow effect becomes greater

      Climate Types of the Northwest: 
        Marine West Coast 
        Subartic
        Warm Summer Continental 
        Warm-summer mediterranean 
        Cold-arid/ Steppe
        Midlatitude / Code Desert

      Population in the PNW: 
        12 million residents in just OR and WA 
        Most live along I-5 corridor 
        Population doubled since 1970

        NW growth rte twice the national rate

        What does a growing popi;lation mean?
          4% of pariarie and savannas left in the Willamette Valley 
          over 70% of the NWs orginial old growth conifer forset lost 
          50% of the Puget Sound shoreline modified
          75% of saltwater marsh habitat destroyed
          Over 20 salmon/Steelhead specie sextinct or endangered

        adaptation:
          The process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and effects 
          "Changing your own behavior to avoid potential harm"

        mitigation
          A human intervention to stop the change 
          "Reducing the source and enhancing the sinks if greenhouse gases"


  my own definition:
    adaptation is an action taken to reduce one's vulnerabiliity to climate change impacts. This results in finding solutions 
    to coexist with climate change impacts or completely avoids them. Adaption is a response 

    mitigation is actions taken to directly reduce carbon emissions. This is a direct solution to climate change. We can perform 
    this by reducing the sources or enhancing the carbon sinks


    There is a more adaptation options than mitigation efforts. This is because mitigation requires actions on a global level

    Adaptation Cycle:
      1. Understanding
        Detect problem 
        Gather/use information
        (re)define problem
      3. Managings
        Develop options
        Assess....
      2. Planning

  Different strategies come in at different stages of climaet change, and there is no one single "cure all" solution

  Adaption and mitigation go hand in hand

    "Efforts at mitigation could not stand alone unless adaptation was successfully implemented"


What is an energy budget?
  Energy in = Energy out

  (How is Earth's energy being allocated?)

  if we have more energy coming in than out, earth heats up
  vice versa is true as well

  incoming shortwave radiation is mostly transparent to greenhouse gasses. However, outgoing longwave radiation gets absorbed 
  by greenhouse gasses

  Having no atmosphere would prevent Earth from being in equilibrium


  What's in our atmosphere:
    4. carbon dioxide 
    1. nitrogen 
    3. water vapor
    2. oxygen
    methane 
    ozone
    hydrogen
    CFCs
    carbon dioxide 
    argon helium


  99%: nitrogen, water vapor, oxygen

  1%: Rest of the gasses

  Its surprising because carbon dioxide is not very prominent, but it doesnt need to be very abundant to affect the Climate
  system as a whole.

  Less stuff gets reflected back out because the atmosphere absorbs outgoing longwave radiation. The atmosphere is gonna
  re-radiate

  1. Incoming solar radiation 
  2a. Immeadiatly reflected solar radiation
  2b. Solar radiation absorbed by Earth's surface (warms earth's surface)
  3. Surface radiation reflected back
  4. Outgoing solar radiation and back radiation (greenhouse effect because greenhouse gasses are absorbing this radiation)

  Why does the climate change:
    climate forcings: external factors

    radiative forcings = difference between incoming absorbed and emitted outgoing radiation

    External - come from outside the climate system
      - changes in solar output (eccentricity, obliquity, precession)
      - volcanic eruptions
        They're random n shi
      - Man made greenhouse gasses
        - adding more ghgs to earth's atmosphere throws off earth's energy budget
    Internal - occur within the natural climate system:
      - changes to water vapor concentration
        water vapor can act as a runaway greehouse gasses

    What is albedo:
      How white an object is determines how effective it is at reflecting sunlight 

  Review of last class:
    Earth wants to be in aradiative equilibrium 
    IN = OUT

    Temperature will change when forcing causes in > out or in < out (decreases)

    Adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere causes:
       in > out, Earth will warm up


There are many uncertainties - this doesnt mean they dont know, there's just a lot of possibilities

climate sensitivity describes the amount the earth will warm in response to increase in anthropogenic carbon dioxide

  equilibrium climate sensitivity: The amount of warming if we doulbe CO2 and then wait for the world to come back into 
  equilibrium

  RCP (Representitive concentration pathway). Different greenhouse gas mitigation pathways and their projections for the future. 

  Precipitation changes are very unpredictable, especially because of topography changes
  
Summary: Temperature is expected to warm everywhere in the Northwest
  West of the cascades wil warm slightly less due to marine influence
  
  heat extremes will incfeease and measures of cold extremes will decrease 
  
  Extreme precipiatios events are expected to increase but more dffficult to project annual or seasonal changes

25 April 2023:
  Where can water be stored on Earth 
    - Clouds (atmosphere)
    - Biosphere 
    - Cryosphere (permafrost)

    Basic hydrology concepts:
      Stores:
      - where water can be stored for some time period
      Fluxes:
      - move water between stores

    Global water stores:
      Oceans 96.5%
      Ice 1.9%
      Groundwater (non renewable) ~1.6%
      All other stores combined < 0.1%

    Global fluxes:
      - Ocean precipitation and evaporation are largest
      - on land, evaporation is greater than river discharge

    The watershed:
      - An uphill area that drains to the same location

        Example: columbia river - draining to pacific ocean

      Watershed math: All water must "Go" somewhere

      Equation: P = Q + ET + ΔS

      P = precipitation
      Q = discharge
      ET = evapotranspiration
      ΔS = change in storage

    PNW Precipitation:
      Amount and phase vary and are important to water resources

      Precipitation is greater on the west than the east side because of rain shadow effect

      Discharge is the most reliably measured flux

      built resovoirs assists in creating large-scale infrastructure

      EXTRA CREDIT OPPURTUNITY:
        TUES MAY 2 11AM-12PM Burt 193
        THURS MAY 4 11AM-12PM Burt 193
        TUES MAY 9, 10 - 11AM, BURT 193


        SUBMIT 1 PAGE WRITTEN FEEDBACK
        UP TO 20 POINTS EXTRA CREDIT
        5 POINTS FOR ONE, 12 POINTS FOR 2, 20 POINTS FOR ALL THREE
        DUE SUNDAY MAY 14TH


    Irraated agriculture:
      Makes up 90% of consumptive water use in the columbia river basin

      Anticipate needing 16.8 billion m^3/year of water by the year 2030
      which represents a 2.2% increase

      Freshwater aquatic ecosystems:
        August air & stream temperature 
        Salmon may not be likely to survive
  
  What is an estuary:
    Locations where freshwater from a river meets and wmixes with salt water from the ocean - "brackish"

    Experience frequent and predictable changes in salnity, water levels, sunlight, oxygen due to ocean tides.


    estuaries are controlled by riber discharge, sea level rise, storm surges, and ENSO

    ADAPTATION, MITIGATION, OR BOTH? 
      - mitigation -> correct 
      - adaptation -> both 
      - adaptation -> correct 
      - mitigation -> correct 
      - adaptation -> both 
      - adaptation -> correct   
      - both?      -> both 

      textbook - pg 91


