Sepetember 27th 2023:
  - Read over course syllabus

  - No textbook charge

  - thinking about writing in the workplace 

  - Will also do application writing/communication 

  - informal writing and participation

  - grading is similar to WR 327 (hopefully the experience is not as bad)

  - learning outcomes are similar as well

  - Attendance policy: There's in class activities, so even though there's no attedance policy, you still have to be there

  - no slides posted... for some reason

  - dont turn in stuff late as per usual

  - end of each week, there's quizzes - end of each week same as before which is good

  Thinking about the rhetorical setting is important - why is it important to communicate well


okay this class is literally the same as wr 327

Sepetember 29th 2023:
  Effective communication is ALWAYS dependant on the rhetorical situation
ear
  Rhetoricial situation:
    Message - purpose(s) of the Message

    Audience - Consumers of said message 

    Author - Who's writing it 

    Circulating everything above is the context

    Types of context:

    physical location, 
    what medium is the message, 
    culture,
    your field/discipline,
    current events,
    larger culture (international people)

    Author:
      Personality, Education, profession, personal experience, research documentation, is the writing objective/objective - for credibility

    Message (purpose?): clarity, inform, direct/instruct/teach, persuade

    Audience: (NEEDS - what do they know, what don't they know? - What do they need from this communication)
              (When/where/why will this be used? - to finding the best medium to actually transmit this information)

              (Attitudes - preferences, likes dislikes torwards topic, attitudes torwards the author (you), your organization)

              (Values: core principles/beliefs)

    Audience profile:
      Different levels of audience: primary .... secondary

  Informal communication:
    Policy changes, manuals, etc

  Negative communication:
  Complaints, conflicts

  Persuasive or Positive communication:
    ....

  Physical location: America. This is because America has a culture of excessively expensive healthcare 
  Purpose: To advertise (persuade) a solution

  Internal audience:
    include people within your group 
    Coworkers, teammates, boards, commiteees

  External audiences: 
    Customers / Suppliers
    Government agencies
    Competitors
    The public, media

Organizations include:  
  school, club, workplace, city, agency 

Each group has norms of behavior which are revealed in many ways, in addition to written communication

- verbally, through myths, stories, slogans, songs
- Visually, though logos, colors, fonts, designs
- Nonverbally, through gestures and tone of voice allocation of space, money, and power; clothing and dress codes


October 2nd 2023:
  Communication channels:
    Channels include digital, verbal, and hard copy; synchronous and asynchronous 
  
    Channels vary:
      - speed 
      - cost
      - number of people reached
      - efficiency / accuracy 

    What communication channels exist:
      - Websites
      - Blog
      - Email 
      - IM / chat 
      - Social Media


October 4th 2023:
  Emails should be sent within 3 business days (generally)
  cyber slacking or "time theft"

  companies can monitor worker' internet connecdtions and store and review employee e-email

  misuse of office e-mail or internet connections can lead to discipliinary actions or employment termination.
  scandals?

  48% of large companies blame their worst security breaches on employees

  basic parts of emails:
    cc (carbon copy):  
    bcc (blind carbon copy): good for privacy because bcc allows for the mail to not show the email of the recipiants
    send button
    subject line:
      simple:

      specific:

      cannot have more than one subject in an email communication

    Salutation:
      Dear professor _______,
      Dear colleagues,
      Good morning,
      Hi everyone,
      Greetings!
      John,

      Mr. Ms. Mrs.?
      When in doubt, state full name
      add a positive buffer?
      "I hope your term is off to a good start"
      "It was great to meet you and learn about..."

      Neutral buffer for topic / context 
      As we discussed during yesterday's staff meeting

    The example shown is really bad

    Body of email:
      Use block format
      
      Organize content:
        headings, if appropriate 
        short paragraphs
        bullets, if appropriate
        Bolding, etx, if helpful 

      End with what the reader needs to do:
        for example, "Please send confirmation of your plan"

  (basically dont be a dumbass )



Monday October 9th 2023:

You-attitide:
  consider's reader's Pov 

  respects the readers intelligence and ego

  still work torwards company/author goals

  We at the meijer center for writing believe our services can help students become better writers 

  You attitude: You'll improve asa writer...


  We are shipping your order. September 21, this afternoon

  We are happy to extend you a credit line of 5,000...

  Congrats, you earned this credit line of 5,000!

  newly hires like you will b

  you will be able to take advantage of the biggest inventory in town and get whatever you need


  Stuff to avoid when using You-attitide: 
    - Avoid it in critism
    - Avoid it in assumptions
    
  Positive Diction:
    - no problem
    - yes 
    - it was my pleasure

...missed last class... its been a rough week

October 13 2023:
  Direct apporach for negatives?:
    message is complicated--easily misunderstood 
    urgency, severity, or apology 
    known issue or outcome (not a surprise)
      - like college applications (mannn)
    audience or company values directness or brevity

    This steam deck delay shows transparency... def need
    to look at that later

  Passive voice:
    Use passive verbs when you wantto de-empahsize or when active voice creates
    the wrong tone
  
    Passive: The contract must be completed by March 20th 

    Active: You must complete the contract by March 20th


  It sounds so selfish - he's only out for himself

  3 security breach emails:

  Trip advisor:
    Strongest aspect is brevity given that a security breach is 
    urgent and a serious matter, so clarity is essential. Tripadvisor
    was also quick to mention how the breach affects their customers, which
    is essential in managing panic. One con is that they left no informational
    resources.

  One con of wallgreens is the mentioning of being aware of email scams
  this is both a pro and con but the context of this statement shifts blame

  is it factually correct to blame the customers? The customers are usually 
  wrong then.


  Negative news scenario:
    Project on my own:
      Come up with a complaint scenario
      
      writing a formal complaint letter to a business

16 October 2023:
  International English:
  - Simplify 
  - Specify 
  - Research

  Guidlines for global audience: 
    - Be concise 
    - Use active voice 
    - Use parallelism 
    - Use consistent terms 
    - Avoid pronouns
    - Avoid idioms, Slang, etc 
    - Avoid holiday references
    - Avoid negative construction

    Home Depot in China
    - DIY

    Walmart Japan/Germany
    (Japan thought this was lower quality because cheap lmaoo)
    - Everyday Low Prices 
    - Customer Service

    Dunkin donuts:
      - Variations in Taste
    Airbnb:
      - One less stranger

    Apply this to the good news scenario 
    (make multicultural sentence structure/diction)

    Tone: Author's implied attitude

    When presenting bad news; you probably need to be unbiased

    Pick a good scenario for the bad news project

18 October 2023:
  Cut redundancies

  "The computer programming director to confirm a switch to an efficient software"

20: October 2023:
  They're/ Their /there

  Grammer is very important: follow all grammar conventions 

  Also, read your text aloud to identify faults in 

  Have a sentence boundary issue:
    
    Subject, Predicate, Complete idea
    if one of these is not present, we create a sentence fragment
    A run on is not a long sentence, a short sentence is not a 
    sentence fragment

    "I would rather be somwhere quiet. If I need to be able to think."

    CORRECTION:
    "I would rather be somwhere quiet,If I need to be able to think."

    Most mistakes in English cannot be committed in speech; they can only be 
    made in writing.

    coordinating conjuctions: but, and, nor, for, or yet, so

    Semicolon can be used as super comma:
      The students in th class were from Lynchburg, Virginia; 
      Washington, D.C; 

    Separate the dependant clause and independant clause 
      "Because my wife died, my home is fully under my name"

    Restrictive vs Non-Restrictive Clauses:
      Gluseppe said his birthmark which had been bothering him for years,
      had to be removed. 

    M-Dashes:
      can be included for breaks in a sentence 

    Colon: 
      Only time when a colon is necessary is for emphasis and long lists


missed last class...


October 25 2023:
Sufficient clause:
  likely to produce results you are suggestion
necessary cause:
  it is necessary to get the results you want

Evidence solution:
  will address the problem and is the best option 

  - analogy
  - precedent 
  - casual reasoning 

Will the audience be willing to perform the action:
  how have you been incited to action vs. agreement?

  think of time you've resisted change - what was the issue?

October 20, 2023:
  Just having variety with different key terms:
    
    Alternative terms/synonyms:
      - use synonynms for better-quality results 
        - Example: teenagers
        - Alternatives: youth, adolescents

      - Related Terms:
          - Use words for similar concepts:
              - Example: smoking
              - Related terms: tobacco , cigarettes

      Quote Marks:
        "rawr" -- searches for this term

      plagarism - intentional types:
        - copying
        - making up information
        - patchwork plagarism

      Not necessary to cite:
        - Widely known or available facts
        - Common knowledge for your field when audience 
          is part of your field

        Cite both in-text and full citations

  Utilize Toulmine model:
    Claims:statements of fact, opimion, or belief that provide the fundamental structure 
    Example: Tution should be free

    Qualifiers: Example: "Tuition should be free for students taht maintain a GPA of 3.0 and volunteers for 100 hours"
    Example: ....


    Warrants:
      Higher educations is beneficial 


    Evidence: facts, statistics, statements by authorities, personal experience, etc
    to back up reasons

    analyzying evidence and if its sufficient is necessary

    Objections:
      disagreements with any main claims, qualifiers, reasons, warrants, or evidence 

    Rebuttal:
      - response to objections

