Januray 11th 2023:

  Pay attention to the specific terms used in questions asked in this class
  some questions may be trying to trick you

  Greenhouse Effect:
    First defined in the 19th century:
      First by Joseph Fourier

      Eunice foot and John Tyndall also contributed to research

      lastly, svante Arrhenius put together everything

    The wavelength of radiation emitted by a body depends of the 
    temperature of that body.

    Hotter - shorter wavelength 
    Cooler - Long wavelength

    As a flame gets warmer, the light turns to cooler colors

    The sun emits short wavelength radiation
    the earth emits long wavelength radiation

    most of UV from the sun and space is being absorbed by the ozone layer

    UV is too high in energy, so it is therefore harmful to living organisms

    Earth is trying to release infared energy, trying to cool itself down, but greenhouse gases
    trap in this heat, which keeps the earth warm in temperature.

    SW radiation from Sun absorbed by earth

    Emitted back from earth as LW radiation

    Greenhouse Gases: mostly transparent to incoming SW radiation

    HOWEVER, GHG's strongly absorb outgoing LW radiation emitted by Earth

    Decrease GHG concetration, absorb less outoging LW radiation - planet cools
    (because we're releasing less heat)

    Result: Earth's surgace is ~55 Degrees F (31C) warmer with atmospheric
    GHGs than without

    isotopes: atoms with identical chemical, but different mass

    atmospheric co2 has become more negative (light), so we know that 
    the increase in CO2 is from burning of fossil fuels, not from other
    sources like volcanic activity.


January 13 2023:
  Earth System Science:

    System - Set of components that interact with one another to operate as a single entity
    Analogy - human body (heart, lungs, brain)

    Change in one component - will affect one or more of other components in some way 

    Result: entire system changes

    Examples (biosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere)

    Five compnents of Earth System: 

    solid earth (lithosphere, mantle, core)
    atmosphere
    hydrosphere
    cryosphere
    biosphere.......

  Two major engines of change (regarding greenhouse effect):
    Solar radiation (solar panel on the surface)
    Geo thermal heat (nuclear reactor in the core)


  Energy drives change through convection: transfer of energy, causing motion

  Concvection within solid earth heat supplied from radioactivity

  incoming solar radiation unevenly distributed more energy at equator than poles
  (Less sunlight in areas other than equator, because you're absorbing more sunlight over larger amount of area)
  (Equator is like directly getting hit by the sunlight, so its warmer. The poles are gonna be colder, causing atmosphere)

  atmosphere circulation transfers warm air from the tropics to areas where there are an energy deficit

  Convection in the ocean:
    Dense water sinks, forms deep water...

  Water is being transferred in the tropics to the poles, so the water is being cooled very rapidly - become more dense and sinks

  The oceanic transports heat from the low latitudes to the high latitudes
  ......

  System compnents interact - feedbacks

  Two major feedbacks: (just like in ib bio)
    Positive (changes your equilibrium)
    Negative (brings you back to equilibrium)

    positive feedbacks will amplify the effect of something in a system (for example, the albedo effect)

  more sea ice - more reflection 
  less sea ice - more absorbtion of sea ice

  Currently, there is a reduction in the cryosphere (albedo effect) (bad for the fucking polar bear - best bears god damn)

  2016 reached a record low global sea ice extent 

  The reduction of albedo effect is the main driving force for polar amplifciation

Example of a negative feedback loop that is combatting against reduction in albedo effect: 

  Increased evaporation and cloud formation -> more solar radiation - reduced warming

  Warming from climate change with feedbacks:
    is a lot larger due to positive feedback loops

January 18th 2023:
  
  Geologic time:
    immense length of time over which large global changes have occured

    Where it started:
      Universe started with the big bang 13.7 billion years ago - earth is 4.6 billion years ago

    Where did all the elements come from?

    Just after the big bang, we tons of helium and hydrogen everywhere
    
    Heavy elements are produced inside starts by ----nuclear fusion----:

      Our sun : He -> H = asjdfadfasdf

      iron and nickle heaviest elements produced


      Big bang mostly hydrogen some helium, but most helium was overshadowed by helium produced by nuclear fusion 

    Closest observed supernova:
      Supernova 1987A

    other supernova: Crab nebula 1054AD supernova explosion

    is betelgeuse next? (next star to go supernova)

  Elements come from:
    Big bang - light elements
    Fusion in stars 
    Super nova explosions -- iron and nickle
    Remaining elements are only made in the laboratory

  Why there is so much iron and nickle:
    Hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and helium all burn until everything turns into iron and nickle

  Geologic time:
    How do we measure time?
    How old is the earth?

    In 1785, James Hutton pioneered the concept of geologic time

  Uniformtarianism "the present is the key to the past"
                    Processes operating at same rates today as in the past - Geologic Time

  Carbon dating - Measure time with radioactive isotopoes (same number of protons, differing number of neutrons)

  Stable isotopes do not decay over time 
  radioactive isotopes decay

  Radioactive decay:
    Parent isotope --> daughter isotope

    Rate of decay - described by half life:
      Time required for 50% of parent to decay from previous value (100% to 50% to 25% to 12.5%)

    Looking at the decay rate of the daughter isotope we can find find the age of that isotope

    Different "clocks" for each elements (each element tells you how old it is, thus, different clocks or records of time)

  Oldest Known mineral on earth:
    4.4 billion years ago

  We can also measure time by dating meteorites:
    oldest meteorite formed at the same time as earth 4.5662 billion years ago

January 20 2023:
  Date meterorites formed - once again, same time as earth formed

  Four topics today: A. Origin of the solar system

  The sun: 
    plasma made up of H and He 

    inner planets: clostest to sun classified as "rocky" plants
                    (Si, O, Mg, Fe)

    outer plants: further from sun -> gas planets (mostly H and He)

    Why this distribution of plants

    Nebula hypothesis:
      Started as cloud of interstellar gas

      1. Cloud - contracted under their own weight
          (clouds of more weight will begin to pull more things given its gravity)
          (This pulling force causing angular momentum)

      2. Forms solar nebula:
          A flat, rotating disk with matter concetrated at the center that will 
          become the proto-sun

      3. Condensation in disk surrounding protosun 

      4. Accretion - gas and dust forms grains collide and clump together
          into larger chunks (planetesimals)
          (terrestrial planets grew by accretion of planetismals)

    Formation of the moon:
     1. Theia collided with infant Earth
     2. Debris from collision into orbit 
     3. Debris from collision collapses into orbiting disk 
     4. Debris accretes to form moon 

     Age of earth: 4.56 

     Oldest rocks on moon: 4.51 

     Moon thus formed shortly after earth 

     Late Heavy bombardment:
      Cratering of the moon's rufaces indicate planets sweeping up 
      remaining debris (accumulation)

    Last step in origin of the solid earth - planetary differentiation
      distribution of elements within a planet is roughly the same 
      everywhere 

    (1) After initial formation interior heats up from:
      - radioactive heats
      -impacts

    (2) Heavy elements melt and sink, lighter elements rise

    (3) Differentiate plants into lithosphere, mantle, core


  January 23 2023:
    La nina
    ....

    el nino 
    .....


    The origin of life:
      Abiogensis (chemical evolution):
        The idea that life evolved spontaneously from inorganic/inanimate compound through self-organization

        "Life was thus an almost utterly improbable event with almost infinte oppurtunities of happening. So it did"

        Started with primordial chemical diversity
          - polymers
          - chiral selection 
          - self organization 
          - prokaryote 
          - eukaryote


        85% of life's history left no direct record

        oldest fossiles:
          0.54 Ga 
        Oldest evidence of microbial life:
          3.5 Ga Strotomalites

        How did life begin?

          The outcome of life right now:
            (all life on earth started from one blueprint)
            - is Cellular
            - Same groups of molecules
            - Same chemistry

          Same molecules:
            Carbon is the basis on all life on earth (organic if it contains carbons)
            Also H, N, O, P, and S

            Amino acids:
              building blocks of protein
              Organic compounds 
              universal component for living things -> This unity suggests one common ancestor

              Two types:
                L amino acid, D amino acid 

                chemically identical but mirror images of each other structurally

                Life exclusively uses the L amino acid
                 (we dont understand this yet)

                L amino acids could turn in D amino acids and vise versa (what the fuck)

                Miller urey experiment (primordial fluid):
                  (Kinda unrelated but there was no oxygen in this environment)

                  - They tried to simulate early earth and fed in foundational chemical molecules
                  - Over 20 different amino acids formed 

                Self assembled cellular containers or "proto-cell"
                phopholipid bilayer formed!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

            Same chemistry:
              Enzyme -> acts as a catalyst for chemical reactions (speeds up reaction... I already know this)

              2018: Nobel prize in chemistry 
                    For this person's work on "directed evolution of enzymes"

                    ....ALL design is evolutionary

          So where did life begin....
            1. primordial life 
            2. hydrothermal vents
            3. panspermia

          (1) - Primordia Soup:
            - all these building blocks.. methane, ammonia phosphoric salts 
            - extremeophiles

          (2) Deep sea Hydrothermal vents (Black smokers):
                - These vents create complex ecosystems around them 
                  (all you need is energy from heat and chemical energy)

          (3) - life orginated from SPACE ????????? ALIENSSSSSS 

              2500 years of panspermia hypthesis:
                500 BC seed of life 
                ...

              some meteorites have a dominant amount of L amino acids

              Life originated from another planet? Could life also arrive on other planets?

              The "rogue" martian meteorites
                Electron microscope showed signs of microbial life (a martian!!)

                Life elsewhere in the universe is not constrained to one origin 
                  - could be panspermia, primordial soup, idk


January 25th 2023:
  Phanerozoic: Visible life 

  Proterozoic 
    Earlier life 

  Precrambian:
    Cenozoic : "young life" 

    Mesozoic: "middle life" 

    Paleozoic: "old Life"

    Precrambian

  Life first diversified into eukaryote and prokaryotes
    prokarytes take the majority of the living life here in numbers

    prokaryotes (don't have a nucleus, literally just IB Bio)

    Eukaryotes: have a nucleus

    How Eukaryotes evolved to be that way:
      Endosymbiotic theory 

      Two prokaryotes: one eats the other but doesnt destroy it. the other one lives in the other and they both thrive
      somehow 

      Strotomalites are fossiles of single celled organisms in 3.5Ga rocks

      likely that life on earth formed 3.8Ga~ ??


      Carbon 12 is mostly abundant

      Carbon 13 is not as abundant


    Evidence of first life is not based on fossils, rather based on isoptopically light carbon in graphite
      inorganic carbon: around 0%

    Cambrian explosion 
    1. Rapid increase in diversity 
    2. Capabillity to make hard shells


January 27th 2023:

  microbial life:
    How to microbiologists study microbes?:
      microbiologists are faced with making a microscopic obesrvation of something extremely small

      Use molecular signatures to study microbial diversity:

      Central dogma of molecular biology
        DNA makes RNA makes protein

      This one scientist's algorithm was able to group human literature, each literature had its own genre assigned to it.
      The same scientist used this system to group proteins

      Life as we know it; mostly microbial

      Life requires thermodynamic disequilibria in the environment to get and 
      store energy 

      life harvests chemical energy by coupling favorable pairs of oxidation and reduction half-reactions and uses 
      energy to do work (they use ATP as the currency)

      Notice how the equation is the reverse of each other

      microbes are have mostly low activities in the deep earth

      in summary:
        molecular signatures explain the details 
        Almost immortal
        ....

        methogenesis:
          Microbes using hydrogen as their source of energy, producing methane

Monday January 30th 2023
  - Starting the diversification of the biosphere

  Geologic time:
    subdivided by changes in life caused by mass extinction 
      (Animals respond to the climate system, they undergo large changes in evidence like fossil records)
        FOSSIL RECORDS are a significant piece of information

    Much of life's history, there was single celled organisms

    There really is a phylogenetic tree of life

    Evolution powers our biodiversity

    Adaptation is the key behind evolution -> survival of the fittest

    Evolution is not just a hypothesis, it is an experiemental observation

    Two sides of the evolutionary Process:
      - Origination of new species 

      - Extinction of species 

    There was a strong species diversification during the Cambrian explosion

  Mass Extinction:
    Loss of a lot of life at once

    Increases the rate of evolution

  There has been 5 mass extinctions in our geologic RECORDS

  The largest mass extinctions divide the eras of life



  Comparing the eras:
    Paleozoic: marine dominant 

      Permian Triassic extinction event 252 Ma

    Mesozoic: a lot of dinosaurs

    THIS WILL BE ON THE EXAM
      Creteaceous-Paleogene extinction event 66Ma

    Cenozoic: a lotta mammals


Origination rate: number of new species over time 

Extinction rate: overall loss of species over time

What caused these mass extinctions:
  
  Two leading hypotheses:
    
    Volcanism 

    Impact event

  Volcanism definition:
    Large and rapid release of lava to earth's surface 

    Formation of a LIP:
      1. Plum forms at core mantle-boundary 

      2. Rises Buoyantly up through mantle 

      3. Plum reaches base of lithosphere, flattens 

      4. Lava erupt to to earth's surface through fissures form "flood basalts"

      Siberian Traps:
        enough lava erupted to cover earth up to 20ft 

        Eruption through an existing coal seem

      There is a strong correlation between LIP and mass extinctions

      Environmental consequnces:
        Co2 -> warming -> oxeanic hypoxia (low oxygen)

Febuary 1st 2023:
  Once again, two leading hypotheses:
    Volcanism and impact event (asteroid)

    The "great dying" mass extinciton at time of siverian LIP

      Around 95% of marine species were eliminated

      the K-pg mass extinction eliminated 75% of species

      4 evidence types for impact event:
        - iridium (Underwent planetary differentiation, asteroids have them beause they are too small to differentiate)
        - shocked quartz (only forms at very high pressure)
        - tektities (formed from molten rock droplets)

      Where did that large asterioid impact earth 66 million years ago?

      Environmental consequences:
        1. Energy released 
        2. Regional:
            - Earthquakes (>10 magnitude)
            - Tsunamis
        3. Global:
            Vaporize rocks - Co2 sulfric accident


  K-pg extinction:
    A double wammy of LIP and an asteroid event

    The K-pg was the only one with strong evidence for impact

    Was the permian triassic extinction also a double wammy?

  We gotta think about reccurance intervals when discussing impact events:
    big ones happen +/- 100 million years

February 3rd 2023:
  Evolution of the atmpshere:
    The composition of the atmoshere has changed; 4.5Ga ago we didnt even have an atmosphere

  Volatiles:
    A chemical compound with a relatively low boiling point
      (these are liquids that turn gaseous at room temperature)

    Large atmospheric changes in 3 stages 
    1. Prebiotic - no life, so no oxygen; 
      Volatile degassing from planetary interior
        Volcano degassing or impact degassing

        Mantle volatile degassing is part of planetary differentiation 

        Comets played a key role in providing water to the planets. Isotope ratio of oceans is similar to that of Comets

        oldest mineral known on earth has evidence of liquid H20 

        Origin of life - major factor in subsequent changes in atmospheric composition

    2. Biotic - pre oxygen
      at the time of origin of life, oxygen was a toxin

      the primary forms of life before oxygen was METHANOGENSIS -> anoxygenic photosynthesis

      Methane is a byproduct 

      Early atmosphere was concentrated with methane

    3. Biotic - oxygenated 
      Cyanobacteria evolution, performing photosynthesis where oxygen is a byproduct

      The great oxidation event occured 2.4Ga years ago !!!

      The real question is: how did we know this happened... USING MINERALS AND ROCKS AS INDICATORS

    REDOX REACTIONS:
      
      The GOE (great oxidation event) changed earth's surface chemistry

      This was facilitated by redox reactions because more oxygen led to a more oxidized environment

      - interior of earth is reduced
      - hydrothermal vents but Fe(II) in ocean 
      - early ocean was anoxic 
      - oxygen in surface ocean goes and oxidates stuff

    Banded iron formations:
      Red areas indicate a point of time where the rocks became very oxygenated (rust)
      the black bands indicated no redox reactions occured

      Decrease in methane and Co2, as a result of increased Co2 
        Co2: buried in ROCKS
        methane: short life time in the atmpshere

      Summary:
        Prebiotic - 4.5-3.8 Ga 
        Biotic - preoxygenated 3.8 - 2.5 Ga
        Biotic - oxygenated 2.5Ga - present

        Have 300x as much carbon than oxygen

        The ratio of carbon to oxygen is 1:1


    LIFE's BATTERY
      We have a biosphere and oxygen 

      Surface oxidations takes a lot of oxygen, the biosphere, however, removes carbon through getting buried in sediment
      after dying. Oxygen is always there, but life is continously removing carbon


MIDTERM EXAM ON FEB 10TH 

CONTENT:
WEEKS 1-4

      3 short answer
      3 list questions
      6 short answer questions
        - Explain how the greenhouse effect works

____________________________________________________

Plate Tectonics:

  "geology" of the class 

  Contintental drift:
    Precursor to plate techtonics
    propopsed in 1912 by alfred wegener

    Fit of coastline and similar rock types of each continent leads to the idea that the continents were one unit

  Problem:
    how the fuck did the continents move??
    
  Plate techtonics:
    General hypothesis:

    Plate techtonics:
      General hypothesis:
       1. lithosphere comprised of several planetes 
       2. plates move relative to each other 
       3. continents ride "piggyback"
       4. motion driven by convection

    Three types of plate boundaries:
      Divergent plate boundary:
        - spreading 
        - mid-ocean ridges
        - new crust is created

      Transform plate boundary:
        - horizontal movement 
        - no crust created or destroyed 

      Convergent plate boundary:
        - subduction
        - crust is destroyed



where does oceanic crust form, and where is it destroyed?
  forms from mid ocean ridges (Divergent zones)
  and is destroyed at subduction zones (Convergent zones)

Does continental crust behave in the same way (in the conveyor belt cycle):
  Continental crust doesnt necessarily have the conveyor belt process, but the removal of crust is throuh
  erosion, so they relatively the same in their end goals

Why is the oldest oceanic crust older than continental crust?
Formation of conintents happened a lot after the formation of oceanic crust due to mid ocean ridges

Where is the ocean the deepest?:
  The convergent boundaries, there is a downward slope down

  Order these by density from least to greatest:
    higher up you are, the lower density it is 

    continental crust, oceanic crust, asthenosphere

  Continental rock is usually granite (2700kg/m^3), while oceanic rock is basalt (2900kg/m^3)

  continental crust is kinda like a leaf floating in water.

1940s-60s:
  Proving plate techtonics:
    1. mid ocean ridges
    2. deep sea trenches
    3. distribution of earthquakes
      Pacific ring of fire
    4. distribution of volcanoes
    5. Earth's magnetic field and paleomagnetism
      - ID's magnetic field reversals

February 13th 2023:
  Global warming
  - Climate System
      Forcing - interection - variations

  Timescales of climate change: slow
    260 Ma: Pangea 

    65 Ma: Current continental layout

  Timescales of climate change: fast
    El nino - La nina (2-7)

  Timescales of climate change:
    tectonic (>1 Myr), orbital(10 kyr - myr), millenial (0.5 - 101), dec-cen

  Climate "forcings"
    Mechanisms that cause climate change:
      Example: changes in the sun
  
  Climate forcings:
    Timescale:
      - tectonic
      - Orbital 
      - millenial
      - decadal-centennial

  The main way the plant processes energy is the greenhouse effect:
    Most of earth's energy absorbed as short wavelength energy !!!

  Total amount of carbon is fixed 
  carbon is divided over several reservoirs (source of carbon is vegeatation)
  only carbon in the atmpshere contributes to warming


  During the summer, the earth is breathing it a lot of carbon; in fall and winter, organisms die and they release their carbon


  Biosphere, lithsosphere, atmoshere are the resovoirs involved in burning fossil fuels

  Long term carbon cycle:
    1. chemical weathering:
      Dissolving minderals in presence of water and co2, which creates dissolved products.
      Dissolved products are carried by rivers to ocean

    2. ocean mineralization: 
      In ocean, used by organisms to make shells (resources are broken down on land and utilized my marine species)

    3. volcanic degassing: 
      plates are pulled under through plate techtonics, melted, and remitted as co2 through volcano magma

February 15th 2023:
  
   long term carbon cycle is a negative feedback loop:
      Increased carbon burial through chemical weathering, earth cools down but is then regulated by volcanic degassing

    the rate of volcanic degassing is controlled by the plate movements into subduction zones


    Increasing chemical weathering:
      1. increase temperature
      2. increase mountain building


I MISSED LAST LECTURE FREE MEEEEEEEE (GONNA THE NOTES TODAY FOR THAT) (I lied but ill do it today I think)

February 20th 2023:

  Ice Ages:

    Deep ocean temperature has a strong correlation to glaciation

   East Antartica has more ice sheets, while west Antartica has a lot less. 

   West antartica is being studied rn because it is primarily below sea level 

   Why is the last glacian maximum almost equal to the modern glacial maximum?

   Antartica is at its maximum because there cant be expansion of sea ice. you need land to 
    grow ice on, but antartica is already expanding on the sea.

  Modern landforms have much to do with glaciation. The great lakes, for example. 


When warming stops, sea level will continue to rise because it is still rising in response to past warming
  Global sea level was 120-130m lower than it was today 

  oregon - washington coast 

  I fucked up bruh - holy shit I fucked up. from future me, nah you didnt - you're fineeeeeee

  How did we end up in the ice ages?:
    Orbital Variability:
      1. Eccentricity - how elliptical the earth's orbit is (the shape of earth's orbit) (100,000 years)
        Give less radiation of earth - earth is farther away; the energy is being distributed over a larger area 

      2. Obliquity - The tilt of the earth (Basically earth's axis going back and forth) (41,000 years)
9
      3. Axial Precession (The wobble of earth's axis) (Basically the axis wobbling n shi) (23,000 years)


    Obliquity causes the seasons - The strength of tilt equals the strength of that season 

    only thing that changes the amount of solar energy in the planet is Eccentricity

    need colder summers to grow ice sheets in northern canada

      1. Summer season = melt season of glacier 

      2. Cooler summers - less melting - ice grows 

      3. Warmer summer - ice melts - ice retrears 

    1. Northern hemipshere changes most during glacial cycles because more land to grow ice one

Wednesday February 22 2023:
  Speleothems:
    Greek words: meaning cave and deposit 

    Are secondary mineral deposits on the ceilings, walls, and floors of caves

    Calcarous spleothems are the best at recording climate information 

    Spleothmes are basically fossilized water


    Where to find them:
      found in caves located in carbonate bedrock

    formations of Speleothems:
      - Flowstone
      - Stalagmites 
        ....
      - Stalacites
        oldest layers are at the center
      - Flowstone


    Formation of a Speleothems:

      we need liquid water to form speleothems

      - Soil zone
        - need soil to make raindrop slightly acidic 
      - Dissolution
      - Precipitation

    freezing temps
      - prevent speletothems

      - speleothmes cannot grow during inerglacial periods (water frozen !! oh my godd)
    Proxies:
      mineraology 
      growth phases
      growth rate 
      oxygen isotopes 
      carbon isotopes 
      deuterium
      trace elements
      pollen
      flood layers
      broken

   chinese monsoon:
    changes in solar radiation are due to due to changes in distance from earth to the sun

  How we date Speleothems
    - Uranium-Thorium dating

    Uranium is soluable and thorium is insoluable

    We check the ratio of Uranium-Thorium ratio to verify age 


February 24th, 2022

Time scales of climate change: 
tectonic, orbital, millenial, dec-cen 

Different time scales have different forcings of change: 
CO2, seaways, sun, ocean-ice, ocean-atm, volcanoes 

Paleoclimate proxies: 
climate proxies are an indirect source of information used to estimate climate conditions prior to direct observations

natural archives: 
ocean and lake sediments
tree rings
ice cores
speleothem (cave)
human archives: 
  paintings
  harvest dates
  ship logs

tree rings are the youngest, while ocean sediments are the oldest

More years is less specificity = less resolution 

less years show more detail on seasonal patterns: higher resolution

todays focus: ocean sediments

foraminifera are microorganisms with calcium carbonate
  - they are incorporating carbon isotopes into their shells (carbon isotops tell if something is organic or not)

When evaporating lighter oxygen 16, they are built up and locked away into ice sheets. The ocean will have a lot of heavier
isotopes instead. Thus, when the ice sheets melt, lighter oxygen 16 become free. The ratio of heavy to light istotopes is more 
skewed to being heav

Monday Febuary 27th 2023:
  Ice core records of climate change 

  Antartica holds 58.3 meteres of sea level

  In wood, as you go torwards the center, you are heading to older timelines
 
  Antartica goes back 800,000 years

  Orbital, Millenial, and Dec-en time scales apply to ice cores

  What can we actually learn from ice cores records?
    - WATER ISOTOPES
      Low amounts of oxygen 18 compared to 16 (Rayleigh distillation of water vapor)
      Oxygen 16 likes to get evaporated
    - Chemicals and the dust
    - Gas Bubbles

  Relationship between Antartic ice cores water isotopes and in marine organisms

  If you want to change the isotopic signature, you have to get it from somewhere

  Chemical impurities in ice:
    Na - Sodium 
    Ca^2 - Calcium 
    SO4^2 - Sulfate
    NH^4 Ammonium

  Volcanic Deposits in Ice Cores:

    
During which season will the d18O of snowfall be most negative? And most positive?

As you incease temperature, delta 18 Oxygen increases as there is more energy...

Why do we call d18O in ice cores a proxy for temperature?
signifies relevant temperature

  What we can learn from ice cores continued:
    Firn:
      the upper lower of an ice sheet where snow turns to Ice
    Gasses in ice cores:
      Bubbly ice melting for a measurement of CH4

  Ice cores show what exactly is the naturally occuring global temperature increase:
    Ice core records give context in the past, so we can use the past as a reference


March 1st 2023:
  Water isotopes are a temperature proxy

  Low 18 Oxygen --> low temperature
  High 18 Oxygen --> high temperature

  We warm very quickly, but cool very slowly
  Negative feedback loop, earth wants to go back to 

Global overturning circulation of the ocean:
  Goes around antartica, warms upwards (look how florida)

  Pacific will be a lot colder than the Atlantic

  Pacific is also a lot less salty than the Atlantic

  Taking fresh water from the atlantic, and dumping it in the pacific
  (This is why the atlantic is more fresh)

 Is there anyplace in world’s oceans where surface waters can become dense enough to sink?
  Only two places – North Atlantic Ocean and around Antarctica.

AMOC = 
Atlantic 
Meridional
Overturning
Circulation

This current, AMOC, transports heat to high latitiudes
  Heat is released to the atmposhere as ocean water cools

What if AMOC stops:
  Heat no longer flows north (high latitudes)

Historically cold periods have to do with weak AMOC. If AMOC becomes strong, the heat is deposited in higher latitudes and thus
more warming

AMOC turns on very quickly but takes a long time to slow down

(Dumping fresh water in the north would just make the southern hemipshere warmer)

Deepwater formations is sensitive to freshwater inputs

if we are taking energy to warm the northern hemipshere, the energy must come somewhere
  energy comes from the southern

Friday March 3rd
The past and future goals of global sea level:
sea level rise: about 200mm (8 inches) since 1990

1. Thermal expansion of water
2. Melting of land-based ice

  (Look how greenland and antartica are exponensially increasing, positive feedback loop!)

  Since 1992: 3mm / year (1.2 inch/decade)

  When did this rise begin:
    Sea level rise in the Mid 19th century

  GRACE - Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiement
    - Distance between the two satellites very accurartely measured

    - detect changes in earth gravitational pull

    - can weigh the earth

  Metling mass per year:
    Greenland:
      0.8 mm/year 
    Antartica:
      0.35mm/year

    Calving front retreat of Greenland glaciers

    Antartic Ice Mass Loss:
      The west side is losing a lot more than east (east is even gaining ice!)

    Using corals to reconsutrct sea level:
      Certain types of coral only grow in upper few meteres of oceans

      By dating coral reefs, we can reconstruct past sea level

      Last interglcial: global sea level was 5 to 9 meters higher

      Where did 6m of sea level come from:

    Why west antartica:
      bedrock is below sea level


In 2016 the global average temperature was over 1oC warmer 
than the 20th century average. This temperature is comparable to the 
last interglacial. Why don’t we have 6 m sea level rise yet, like during 
the last interglacial?

  Too fast for the system to respond to this rapid warming, at some point we will probably see the same changes thousands of years
  ago. We are not heating the ocean and land eqaully. We need to wait for the ocean to undergo thermal expansion still


  Sea level responds SLOWLY to temperature

  When warming stops, sea level will continue to rise because it is still rising in response to past warming


MISSED LAST LECTURE FUCK ME

Guest lecture Wednesday March 8th 2023:
  IPCC (intergovernmental panel on climate change)

  The IPCC is made up of the world's governments; it was established in 1988

  Objective:
    provide goernments at all levels with regular assessments of our understanding of climate change that they can use to..
    They never tell governments what to do 

  assessments are written every few years by scientists nominated by their governments and selected by IPCC to serve as coordinating 
  lead authors or lead authors

  "We are not doing the research, we are publishing the assessed literature"

  assessments are organized into three working groups:
    The physical science basis
    impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability
    Mitigation and...

  Each assessment report has fed directly into international climate policy making

  Article 2 of the UNFCCC treaty: 
    aiming to achieve stablilization of greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that would prevent dangerous anthroprogenic interference with 
    the climate system

  TAR: focused oin the impats of climate change

  AR4: Laid the groundwork for a post kyoto agreement, focused on limiting warming to 2C

  1750: Beginning of the industrial revolution, and the beginning of large scale carbon emissions

  ar5: provided the scientific input into the 2015 paris agreement to limit warming to below 2C

  ar6 (2022): Stay tuned...

  The IPPCC Process:
    authors were selected 
    had 5 meetings, where the authors will meet 6 days at a time and work together on each chapter

    The final meeting: Plenary meeting where select authors would attend and present to 2 delegates a summary for policy makers
    a summary for policy makers presents the most policy relevant information 

Friday March 10th 2023:

Guest Speaker Invited to author of Sixth IPCC

Studies migration resulting from climate change and changes in habitability

Worked on working group 2 (the impacts to people and ecosystems)

Sectoral Chapters: Terrestrial and Freshwater ecosystems
                   Oceana nd coastal ecosystems
                   food systems and other key ecosystems

                   1) Key terms
                   2) 6 take-aways from the IPCC

              Key Terms:
                Exposure (To measure exposure we think of frequency, intensity, or magnitude)

                Impact (adverse consequence of climate change)

                Risk (Probability of an impact)

                vulnerability (A specific community's propensity to experience harm)

                Adaptation (adjustments that reduce risk and leverage potential benefits)

                Resilience (Stability of a system, ability to maintain structures, functins and identity)

          Take away #1:
            Climate is a powerful influence on how we leave and what can survive
              Beyond 1.5 - 2 Degrees Celsius is when DANGEROUS anthroprogenic impacts occur

          Take away #2 
           Even temporarily exceed 1.5 degrees C of warming will result in severe and often
              irreversible impacts, especially in nature.

          Take away #3
            Human induced worldwide climate change is already affecting billons of peoples' lives and 
            livelihoods, and the natural world


          Levels of migration:
            Local, internal, regional, global

            Types:
              Voluntary

              Involuntary

          Take away #4:
            In the next 20 years, we will all face sybstantial increased risks from climate change, some more than others

          Take away #5: 
          The close connections between people, nature, and climate come in to even sharper focus when we look 
          beyond 2040

          Take away #6:
            Through --climate resilient development-- we can tackle many of the biggest global challenges and threats at once 



Changes the energy earth is receiving based on its orbit around the sun
  (1) Eccentricity - Change in the shape of earth's orbits

  (2) Obliquity - Change in tilts of Earth's axis
    Energy is dependant on the distance from the source, and the surface area its hitting

  (3) Precession - Change in orientation of Earth's axis
      Precession and Eccentricity have to work together for earth's climate

    Increase title "Extreme Seasons"

    No tilt "no extremity in seasons"

  Changing amount of energy on earth has an impact on all of earth's systems



  Schematic of plate motion:
  
  Divergent plate boundary:
    spreading
    Midocean ridges: materials are forced upward
    new crust is created

  ....

  ....

  Long terms carbon cycle:
    1. Chemical weathering
      acidic rainwater dissolving minerals
    2.  
    3. volcanic degassing


ice sheets: more positive 18 oxygen
marine organisms: more negative 18 
